PaperCritiqueJEP
================

**Goals, findings, and conclusions:**

    One of the genes most commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is CHD8, and despite knowing its mutation’s prevalence, much is yet to be known about its influence on cell function. This study aimed to characterize prominent molecular alterations in genome structure within neurons without CHD8 and link the changes to impaired function within the neurons. The authors looked at how the heterozygous loss of CHD8 affects chromatin organization and regulation of gene expression as well. 

    In order to study the effects of CHD8 loss, the authors engineered two isogenic CHD8+/- human embryonic stem cells using CRISPR-Cas9. These were differentiated into excitatory cortical neurons, which were used to profile CHD8-loss-driven changes in development of synapses and their activity, the accessibility of chromatin, and gene expression within the neurons. They performed RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, and functional synaptic measurements to profile the molecular and cellular consequences of the loss of CHD8. 

    The study found widespread changes in gene expression within these induced neurons, around 1,160 genes (FDR < 0.1), particularly genes involved in synaptic signaling and development. ATAC-seq showed an increase in open chromatin regions, particularly in intronic and intergeneic regions. Many of the differentially expressed genes overlapped with known ASD-associated genes, indicating shared neurodevelopmental pathways. The neurons also showed impaired synaptic activity and reduced firing rates.

    The study concludes CHD8 loss changes within transcriptomic, chromatin, and electrophysical spheres are connected, and may provide a mechanistic link between defects and ASD-related phenotypes. 

**Related datasets and details:**

    The study produced two main datasets of neuronal data: an RNA-seq dataset and an ATAC-seq dataset. The RNA-seq dataset, comparing genotypes of control neurons to CHD8 loss-of-function neurons, was generated through extracted RNA from both types of neurons. RNA libraries were prepared, sequenced, and reads aligned to the human reference genome. Gene-level reads were quantified to create the matrix of expression values for a differential expression analysis, with metadata describing the genotype and differentiation status. 

    The ATAC-seq dataset, assessing chromatin changes between control and loss-of-function neurons, was generated by taking isolated nuclei, inserting transposable elements into open chromatin, and sequencing the fragments, which were mapped to the genome. The matrix created consisted of signal intensity peaks of genomic regions, with metadata indicating genotype. Functional datasets included the measurements of synaptic activity. Firing rates were measured to link to molecular changes in neurons using patch-clamp techniques. 

    Gene Ontology and Reactome databases were used by the authors in this study because they wanted to investigate the overlap between the experiment’s list of differentially expressed genes and those associated with ASD. These databases cover all de novo variants in unaffected and diagnosed children for a range of mental and developmental disorders. They did not create these, just utilized them. Overall, these datasets produced data to compare the control and loss-of-function neurons to characterize molecular and physical changes associated with CHD8. 

**Analytical steps:**

    RNA-seq, the differential expression analysis, was performed using DESeq2, as the main statistical analysis. The RNA-seq read counts were modeled with a negative binomial distribution to account for overdispersion in sequencing data. They included 3 replicates per genotype (control neuron vs loss-of-function neuron) to estimate within-group variability. Differential expression between the neurons was tested using a linear model framework, with the multiple hypothesis testing controlled for false discovery rate using the Benjamini-Hochberg with a significance level of q < 0.1. 

    ATAC-seq analysis aligned and filtered reads to remove and duplicate DNA (Picard MarkDuplicates) as well as mitochondrial DNA (bowtie). Samples were downsampled to 14 million reads to control sequencing depth. Peaks were detected using MACS2, then biological replicates were combined (bedrolls merge) to find unique peaks for each cell line (bedrolls subtract) and strengthen peak confidence. 

    Gene Ontology enrichment analysis was also done, using over-representation testing with FDR correction to identify the biological pathways significantly enriched in loss-of-function neurons. Enrichments of the likely mutations in ASD cohorts were evaluated by chi-square tests to compare observed and expected mutation counts. 

    The electrophysiological functional measurements were analyzed with one-way ANOVA tests to find mean differences in the synaptic firing rates and activity between the neuronal genotypes. Here, they also accounted for within-group variability. 

**Comments and Critiques:**

    The statistical analysis of the results is rigorous, and most of their conclusions are supported by the data. Their use of replicates within both RNA-seq and ATAC-seq analyses were used appropriately along with corrections for within-group variation and off-target signals. Integration of transcriptomic, chromatin, and electrophysical data strengthens the power and applicability of their argument that loss of CHD8 alters neuronal function. The observed functional differences in firing rate and synaptic activity are supported by ANOVA testing and the differential expression results are backed by multiple-testing corrections. 

    However, some of their conclusions rely on inferred mechanics and connections rather than directly based off the mechanisms studied and data produced. While the ATAC-seq data shows increased chromatin accessibility and the RNA-seq data shows altered gene expression, they do not establish a direct link between these changes; correlation between the chromatin accessibility and gene expression does not prove chromatin changes drive theses specific gene expression changes. Additionally, the absence of a more specific sequencing, like ChIP-seq, limits the ability to distinguish the targets of CHD8 from indirect effects. 

    Their use of a false discovery rate threshold of q < 0.1 is a higher significance value, which could allow for more false positives. A stricter threshold or an additional validation value could strengthen confidence in the data. Further and more extensive network-based analysis could have been done to clarify how effected genes interact with the neurodevelopment pathways they say are impinged. 

    Overall, their interpretations are reasonable and largely supported by the produced data. They only overextend on some claims, which can be demonstrated in follow up studies. 
